release blog post: ggplot2 3.4.0 (#604)
tidyverse/tidyverse.org: content/blog/ggplot2-3-4-0/index.Rmd

---
output: hugodown::hugo_document

slug: ggplot2-3-4-0
title: ggplot2 3.4.0
date: 2022-11-01
author: Thomas Lin Pedersen
description: >
    ggplot2 3.4.0 is now on CRAN. Read all about the (mostly internal) changes

>     that makes up this release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    that make up this release.
```

* [ ] Create `thumbnail-sq.jpg`; height and width should be equal
* [ ] Create `thumbnail-wd.jpg`; width should be >5x height
* [ ] `hugodown::use_tidy_thumbnails()`
* [ ] Add intro sentence, e.g. the standard tagline for the package
* [ ] `usethis::use_tidy_thanks()`
-->
```
We're so happy to announce the release of [ggplot2](https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org) 3.4.0 on CRAN. ggplot2 is a system for declaratively creating graphics, based on The Grammar of Graphics. You provide the data, tell ggplot2 how to map variables to aesthetics, what graphical primitives to use, and it takes care of the details. The new version can be installed from CRAN using `install.packages("ggplot2")`.

This release is not full of exciting new features. Instead we have focused on the internals, tightening up of the API, and improving the messaging, especially when it comes to errors and warnings. While the release also contains a few new features these other aspects are the stars of this release.

You can see a full list of changes in the [release notes](https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org/news/index.html)

```{r setup, message=FALSE}
library(ggplot2)
library(patchwork)
library(dplyr)
```

## Hello `linewidth`

> Arguably the biggest user.visible change in this release is the introduction of a new fundamental aesthetic. `linewidth` will from this point on take over sizing of the width of lines---something that was earlier handled by `size`. The reason for this change is that prior to this release `size` was used for two related, but different, properties: the size of points (and glyphs) and the width of lines. Since one is area based and one is length based they fundamentally needs different scaling and the default size scale has always catered to area sizing, using a square root transform. Further, this conflation has also resulted in composite geoms like `geom_pointrange()` where it was difficult to control the line width and point size separately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Arguably the biggest user.visible change in this release is the introduction of a new fundamental aesthetic. From this release on, `linewidth` will take over sizing of the width of lines---something that was earlier handled by `size`. The reason for this change is that prior to this release `size` was used for two related, but different, properties: the size of points (and glyphs) and the width of lines. Since one is area based and one is length based they fundamentally needs different scaling and the default size scale has always catered to area sizing, using a square root transform. This conflation has also made it hard for composite geoms like `geom_pointrange()` to control the line width and point size separately.
```

There is not much to discuss when it comes to how to use this "feature", as it is a matter of switching out `size` with `linewidth` whenever you target stroke sizing:

```{r}
ggplot(airquality) + 
  geom_line(aes(Day, Temp, linewidth = Month, group = Month)) + 
  scale_linewidth(range = c(0.5, 3))
```

> Now, changing such a fundamental thing when a package is as old and widely used as ggplot2 is no small undertaking, and I wish it had been done earlier, but rather late than never. We have gone to lengths to ensure that old code continues to work. For the most part using size will continue to behave like before:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, changing such a fundamental thing when a package is as old and widely used as ggplot2 is no small undertaking, and I wish it had been done earlier, but better late than never. We have gone to great lengths to ensure that old code continues to work. For the most part using size will continue to behave like before:
```

```{r}
ggplot(airquality) + 
  geom_line(aes(Day, Temp, size = Month, group = Month)) + 
  scale_size(range = c(0.5, 3))
```

> As you can see you get the expected plot but also gets a deprecation warning asking you to port your code. Comparing the two legends we can also see the discrepancy in scaling that we discussed above, showing a much more even progression with `linewidth`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see you get the expected plot but also gets a deprecation warning asking you to update your code. Comparing the two legends we can also see the discrepancy in scaling that we discussed above, showing a much more even progression with `linewidth`.
```

```{r}
nc <- sf::st_read(system.file("shape/nc.shp", package = "sf"), quiet = TRUE)
p1 <- ggplot(nc) +
  geom_sf(linewidth = 0.5) + 
  ggtitle("Old default")

p2 <- ggplot(nc) +
  geom_sf() + 
  ggtitle("New default")

p1/p2
```

More minor is a small fix we did to `guide_colorbar()` where it was brought to our attention that the `ticks.linewidth` and `frame.linewidth` weren't given in the same unit as every other line width in ggplot2. This has been corrected and the default has been adjusted to retain the same look but if you have given these specifically in your code you are likely to notice a visual change.

## Other breaking changes

In the grab-bag of breaking changes we have now formally deprecated `qplot()`. It will continue to work as always but will be a bit noisy about it. Don't expect the function to disappear, but the deprecation signals that we don't intend to do further work on `qplot()` to keep it current with new features etc. In the same vein, `stat()` and `..var..` for marking aesthetics from stats are also formally deprecated in favor of `after_stat()`. Again, the result is that using these old APIs will be noisy but still work.

> On the topic of `after_stat()` the values and computations happening inside of this now works on the un-transformed variables rather than the transformed ones. This is a bit esoteric and only applies to aesthetics that have had a scale transformation applied to them, so you may never notice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the topic of `after_stat()`, the values and computations inside of now use the un-transformed variables rather than the transformed ones. This is a bit esoteric and only applies to aesthetics that have had a scale transformation applied to them, so you may never notice.
```

> Lastly, we have made a switch to using `rlang::hash()` instead of `digest::digest()` which may result in the automatic ordering of legends changing, again a pretty minor change.

Reviewer: Mention use of `order` to manually override if needed?

```{r, error=TRUE, fig.keep='none'}
huron <- data.frame(year = 1875:1972, level = as.vector(LakeHuron))
ggplot(huron) +
  geom_line(aes(year, level)) + 
  geom_ribbon(aes(year, xmin = level - 5, xmax = level + 5))
```

We can see that the error message correctly identifies the geom responsible for the layer, communicates during what part of the rendering it happened during, and points to the index of the layer in the case that multiple layers from the same geom have been used. Lastly it shows the original error that can help you with solving the issue.

Hopefully the changes goes a long way to make ggplot2 even more welcoming to new and seasoned users alike. However, this effort is never done and we continue to appreciate issues in the github repository pointing out unhelpful errors or warnings that arises so that we may improve it further.

## vctrs inside

> The last part of the large housekeeping changes in this release is that ggplot2 finally embraces [vctrs](https://vctrs.r-lib.org) and uses it's functions internally primarily for binding data together. Apart from a nice bump in rendering speed it also means that we now better support data types build upon vctrs and subscribe to the more well-defined coercion rules that it provides. The last point is a double edged sword though, as your code may contain a diverse mix of data types in different layers that worked before but doesn't align with the strictness of vctrs. While we have gone to lengths to ensure that your code still works you will begin to see deprecation notices if you e.g. factor on a variable that is incompatible across layers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The last part of the large housekeeping changes in this release is that ggplot2 finally embraces [vctrs](https://vctrs.r-lib.org) and uses it's functions internally primarily for binding data together. Apart from a nice bump in rendering speed it also means that we now better support data types built upon vctrs and subscribe to the more well-defined coercion rules that it provides. The last point is a double edged sword though, as your code may contain a diverse mix of data types in different layers that worked before but doesn't align with the strictness of vctrs. While we have gone to lengths to ensure that your code still works you will begin to see deprecation notices if you e.g. factor on a variable that is incompatible across layers:
```
